The smallest country in the world has a rich, if narrowly focused, history. Religion, art and construction dominate the region that is now the Holy See. Politically, the area followed Rome and Italy until 1929, long before that the region to the northwest of central Rome was inextricably connected to the Catholic Church. In about 65 AD the Romans were sacrificing Christians in Nero's Circo Vaticano, and it's probably here that St Peter - regarded as the first Pope - met his end. About 100 years later the site was abandoned and a small monument to the martyr was erected. In 315, Emperor Constantine ordered construction of a basilica on the apostle's tomb. St Peter's Basilica was consecrated in 326.

The history of the Vatican is a history of power plays, schisms, crusades and inquisitions. For more than 70 years in the 14th century, Rome was pope less. Abandoned because of political instability, the thousand-year-old centre of the Church, founded on the tombs of Saints Peter and Paul, lost not only the prestige of being the home of the papacy, but also the considerable income of tithing Christendom, reducing Rome to extreme poverty. After the return of the papacy, Rome began to strengthen again. Although Rome is now far more self-sufficient, the Vatican is still hugely important to the economic and cultural security of the city.

A thousand years after St Peter's Basilica was built it was - not surprisingly - in a poor state of repair. A new basilica was designed. The demolition of the old one caused great controversy at the time as it involved destroying Byzantine mosaics and frescoes by artists, including Giotto. After 150 years - and with the input of artists like Bramante, Raphael, Michelangelo and Giacomo della Porta, the basilica was completed. Most of the kudos for the massive project rests with Michelangelo, who took it over in 1547, aged 72, and designed the 119m (390ft) dome. The cavernous interior can hold an amazing 60,000 people. Excavations that commenced in 1940 under the basilica unearthed remnants of the original church, a tomb believed to be that of St Peter, and the bones of an elderly, well-built man. Pope Paul VI declared these bones to be those of St Peter.

In the 1870s, during the occupation of Italy by Napoleon III, the papal soldiers - known as the Swiss Guard - provided the only significant resistance to the Italian forces as they reclaimed Rome. They refused to recognise the Kingdom of Italy, so the Pope was stripped of his temporal powers and evicted from his palace. During the 1920s, Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini worked to restore the independent papal state, and autonomy was announced in 1929. The early years of independence saw the establishment and rapid expansion of the Vatican 'society'. A radio station was opened by wireless inventor Marconi in the early 1930s, and the city now has one television station and seven radio stations spreading Good News to anyone who'll listen.

More recently, scandals and innuendo relating to the Italian Mafia's control over the Vatican have surfaced. Given their reported control over the rest of Italy - the Mafia's estimated worth is about 12% of Italy's gross national product - there seems no reason to suppose that crime organizations don't have connections with the Holy See. Rumours were fuelled when Pope John Paul I died suddenly in 1978 after only 25 days in office, having earlier vowed to break the Mafia's hold over the people of Rome. 


The center of Christianity is a huge place harmoniously open to the heavens.
A perfect ellipse surrounded by the magnificent colonnade by Gian Lorenzo Bernini.
Gian Lorenzo Bernini was Alexander VII's favorite architect, the pope who wanted the city of Rome worthy of its role as universal capital of the Church. Bernini made a number of fundamental changes until a few days before the first stone was laid, defining the colonnade as we see it today.
The colonnade contains two hundred and eighty four Doric pillars arranged in four rows with a passage in the middle for carriage. One hundred and forty statues of saints and martyrs surmounted the colonnade.

Related Pages : St. Peter's
Vatican museum
Sistine chapel